Add public documentation for contributors to Agave (#4005)
anza-xyz/agave: docs/src/contributing/pull-request.md

# The PR process for agave source code development

> ## Preparation

Reviewer: Should we include a pointer to https://github.com/solana-labs/solana?tab=readme-ov-file for environment setup?

Author: added reference to the relevant section in agave repo (it has slightly more details)

1. You’ll want a powerful machine for this. Building agave from sources takes a lot of RAM, make sure you have ~30GB to be sure it is enough.
   1. Rust analyzer is quite capable of running on agave source tree, but expect high memory consumption
2. Make a fork of anza-xyz/agave master branch under your own namespace in github. Let us assume it is called ubercoder/agave
   1. Do not ever commit anything into the master branch of your fork. Keep it synced to upstream, this will make rebase process painless.

## When not to file a PR

1. Your code/comments may expose/highlight a security threat in the existing deployed instances

> ## Procedure

Reviewer: I'm thinking we could up-level this section a little bit. Doesn't feel right to get too specific with how to manage git CLI commands. Maybe we can stick to concepts - e.g. rebase from upstream and force push to private branch as opposed to `git rebase master` then `git push –force** fix\_all\_bugs`

Just a thought.. curious what others think.

Author: makes sense, done that.

1. Make a feature branch on ubercoder/agave repo, e.g. fix\_all\_bugs
2. Pull from ubercoder/agave the master and fix\_all\_bugs branches
3. Make any necessary changes to fix\_all\_bugs
   1. Commit and push as appropriate, make sure your commits are sensibly sized
4. To keep track of changes in upstream anza-xyz/agave:
   1. Sync the ubercoder/agave master branch with upstream. You can do this with cli or github. **This should always fast-forward** since you are never committing anything to  ubercoder/agave master.
   2. Pull the latest version of ubercoder/agave master to your local machine if you have updated your fork via github
   3. `git checkout fix\_all\_bugs; git rebase master;` to pull in the changes made in upstream’s master into your feature branch. Fix conflicts if necessary. Follow applicable rebase guides.
   4. `git push –force** fix\_all\_bugs ` branch to rewrite its history (necessary due to rebase that was made)
5. To create a PR:
   1. Go to ubercoder/agave, switch to fix\_all\_bugs branch, and make PR against anza-xyz/agave master
   2. Choose “make draft PR” option so it does not pollute the PR list before you are sure that CI checks pass

>    3. Make sure CI passes, then switch to actual PR for review

Reviewer: community PRs will actually not kick off CI unless someone with privileges adds the CI label

Author: And once CI label is added the process is the same as for core devs, right?

Reviewer: Yes, I believe it's pretty much the same

   4. Find some nice reviewers to go over your code. If you do not know whom to choose as reviewer, ask around on discord.

> 6. To appease the CI scripts, run this procedure before you push to the branch subject to CI:

Reviewer: Maybe this section should come before the Create PR section?

Author: reorganized the sections a bit (prep first, CI prep second, finally actual PR and review)

# The PR process for agave source code development

## Preparation

> 1. You’ll want a powerful machine for this. Building agave from sources takes a lot of RAM, make sure you have ~30GB to be sure it is enough.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. You’ll need a powerful machine for this task. Building Agave from source requires a significant amount of RAM—aim for at least 30GB to ensure sufficient memory.
```

Reviewer 3: why was this resolved? Kirill's suggestion here is great

Author: I have messed up the rebase when splitting PRs. Fixing now.

>    1. Rust analyzer is quite capable of running on agave source tree, but expect high memory consumption

Reviewer 2: It is a name of the tool, so I would use `-`
```suggestion
   1. Rust-analyzer is quite capable of running on agave source tree, but expect high memory consumption
```

2. Make a fork of `anza-xyz/agave` master branch under your own namespace in github. Let us assume it is called `ubercoder/agave`

>    1. Do not ever commit anything into the master branch of your fork. Keep it synced to upstream, this will make rebase process painless.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Do not ever commit anything into the master branch of your fork. Keep your branch synced with the upstream; this will make the rebase process much smoother.
```

Reviewer 3: I like Kirill's suggested change here

   2. Whenever you want to pull agave code, pull it from your fork not from agave repo directly.
3. Follow a guide to set up a reasonable rust development environment, e.g. [this one](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/?tab=readme-ov-file#building)
   1. Make sure you can at least build the code before proceeding

> 4. Plan the minimal viable set of changes you'd need to achieve your goals. Idea is to keep your PRs as small and simple as feasible.

Reviewer 2: I think this topic of what should be the size of the PR should be addressed in more details. 

Consider scenario when a developer prepared a large chunk of changes to some component. Currently, it is implicitly assumed that he/she should split these changes into several PRs. Firstly, there might be different approaches to define the size of each PR. Secondly, having a chain of small PR might make a semantics of each PR to be obscure. Hence, there should be an issue which describes the context, describes a chain of changes and place of each PR in the whole chain of changes.

Author: I'm in full support of this. There are some decent ideas in CONTRIBUTING.md, which of them do you like?

   2. Make sure you explain exactly why this PR is useful on its own merit
   3. If you expect to follow with more PRs to expand on a feature, make it clear
7. If you are not agave core developer, your PR will be reviewed by one, and, assuming it gets approved, CI process will be enabled for it.
   1. If you are a developer, consider choosing “make draft PR” option so your PR does not pollute the PR list before you are sure that CI checks pass
8. Wait for github to run CI, this will take about 1 hour. Make sure CI passes, and your PR will be ready for final review
   1. Find some 2-3 nice reviewers to go over your code. If you do not know whom to choose as reviewer, ask around on discord.
   2. Remeber, reviewers are humans and have feelings too.
   3. If CI does not pass, fix whatever is necessary and push again into the `fix_all_bugs` branch
10. Gotchas:
   1. If any of the Cargo.lock files are changed by the steps above, make sure to commit them too, else CI will punish you with inscrutable errors
   2. In some cases it may be necessary to manually [coerce Cargo.lock updates](#coerce-cargo.lock-updates)

# Tips and Tricks

## Unsorted deps {#unsorted-deps}

>   If your Cargo.toml is not perfectly following dtonlay's recommendations, CI will not approve your commit. Use cargo-sort to fix that.

Reviewer 2: Missing a reference for these dtonlay's recommendations.

Author: cargo-sort is dtonlay's crate that implements them. Not sure we need another reference=)

```sh
./cargo install cargo-sort
./cargo sort
```

## Convince a build script that your crate has correct version

>    In your Cargo.toml you will normally want to inherit the workspace version, which cargo new will default-init to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In your Cargo.toml you normally want to inherit the workspace version, which `cargo new` will default-init to
```

```toml
version.workspace = true
```

   But it will not work, you need

```toml
version = { workspace = true }
```

   And yes, they do the same exact thing. But the first one will fail in CI. No CI is perfect.

## Coerce Cargo.lock updates {#coerce-cargo.lock-updates}

   Sometimes Cargo.lock files can be feisty, to manually coerce Cargo.lock updates, use

```sh
./scripts/cargo-for-all-lock-files.sh tree
./scripts/cargo-for-all-lock-files.sh check --locked --tests --bins
```

## Squash the unnecessary commits{#pr-squash-commits}

> 1. You may want to set your EDITOR variable to the editor of choice prior to starting this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. You may want to set your `EDITOR` environment variable to the editor of choice prior to starting this.
```

# The PR process for agave source code development

## Preparation

1. You’ll want a powerful machine for this. Building agave from sources takes a lot of RAM, make sure you have ~30GB to be sure it is enough.

>    1. Rust analyzer is quite capable of running on agave source tree, but expect high memory consumption

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Rust-analyzer is capable of running on the Agave source tree but expect high memory consumption
```

2. Make a fork of `anza-xyz/agave` master branch under your own namespace in github. Let us assume it is called `ubercoder/agave`
   1. Do not ever commit anything into the master branch of your fork. Keep it synced to upstream, this will make rebase process painless.

>    2. Whenever you want to pull agave code, pull it from your fork not from agave repo directly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   2. Whenever you want to pull agave code, pull it from your fork not from the agave repo directly.
```

3. Follow a guide to set up a reasonable rust development environment, e.g. [this one](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/?tab=readme-ov-file#building)

>    1. Make sure you can at least build the code before proceeding

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Make sure you can build the code before proceeding
```

4. Plan the minimal viable set of changes you'd need to achieve your goals. Idea is to keep your PRs as small and simple as feasible.

## When not to file a PR

1. Your code/comments may expose/highlight a security threat in the existing deployed instances

## Procedure

1. Make a feature branch on ubercoder/agave repo, e.g. `fix_all_bugs`
2. Pull from `ubercoder/agave` the master and `fix_all_bugs` branches
3. Make any necessary changes to `fix_all_bugs`
   1. Commit and push as appropriate, make sure your commits are sensibly sized
4. To keep track of changes in upstream `anza-xyz/agave`:
   1. Sync the `ubercoder/agave` master branch with upstream. You can do this with cli or github. **This should always fast-forward** since you are never committing anything to  ubercoder/agave master.
   2. Pull the latest version of ubercoder/agave master to your local machine if you have updated your fork via github
   3. Checkout the `fix_all_bugs` branch and rebase it onto master's head (`git rebase master`) to pull in the changes made in upstream’s master into your feature branch. Fix conflicts if necessary. Follow applicable rebase guides.

>    4. Now you can force-push the `fix_all_bugs ` branch to rewrite its history on the gitlabserver (necessary due to rebase that was made)

Author: typo, fixed in 67565b2f50

5. Make sure you run this procedure before every commit that you intend to push for review:
   1. Make sure your code builds without warnings - `./cargo build` is a good start
   2. Run tests on all packages you have worked on ``` ./cargo test \--package \<crate\_name\> ```

>       1. Just running cargo test in the root directory will run a bunch of tests that will fail on your machine, only run the tests on the crates you touch.

Author: Done in 67565b2f50

   3. If your crate has examples, they should get built by cargo test also, but they will not get run. Make sure they work correctly, CI will not hold your hand here.
   4. ``` /scripts/cargo-fmt.sh && ./scripts/cargo-clippy.sh```
   5. Make sure your Cargo.toml files are *perfect* [by sorting them](#unsorted-deps)

>    6. Make sure there are no trailing whitespaces anywhere `git diff origin/master --check --oneline`

Author: Not in files which are not .rs, so if you have edited e.g. any markdown files you still need this check.

      1. If you find any in files that cargo fmt will not fix for you, you can use e.g. `sed  's/[ \t]*$//'` to fix them manually
   7. You can manually run an approximation of full github CI with ``` ./ci/run-local.sh``` to diagnose any problems
   8. Once all of the above checks pass, make the final commit and push `fix_all_bugs` branch to github
      1. Make sure you [squash unnecessary commits](#pr-squash-commits) to ensure your commit log is sensible
6. To create a PR:
   1. Go to `ubercoder/agave` on github, switch to `fix_all_bugs` branch, and make PR against `anza-xyz/agave` master
   2. Make sure you explain exactly why this PR is useful on its own merit
   3. If you expect to follow with more PRs to expand on a feature, make it clear
7. If you are not agave core developer, your PR will be reviewed by one, and, assuming it gets approved, CI process will be enabled for it.

>    1. If you are a developer, consider choosing “make draft PR” option so your PR does not pollute the PR list before you are sure that CI checks pass

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. If you are an agave core developer, consider choosing “make draft PR” option so your PR does not pollute the PR list before you are sure that CI checks pass
```

8. Wait for github to run CI, this will take about 1 hour. Make sure CI passes, and your PR will be ready for final review

>    1. Find some 2-3 nice reviewers to go over your code. If you do not know whom to choose as reviewer, ask around on discord.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Find some 2-3 nice reviewers to go over your code. If you do not know who to choose as a reviewer, ask around on discord.
```

   In your Cargo.toml you will normally want to inherit the workspace version, which cargo new will default-init to

```toml
version.workspace = true
```

   But it will not work, you need

```toml
version = { workspace = true }
```

   And yes, they do the same exact thing. But the first one will fail in CI. No CI is perfect.

## Coerce Cargo.lock updates {#coerce-cargo.lock-updates}

   Sometimes Cargo.lock files can be feisty, to manually coerce Cargo.lock updates, use

```sh
./scripts/cargo-for-all-lock-files.sh tree
./scripts/cargo-for-all-lock-files.sh check --locked --tests --bins
```

## Squash the unnecessary commits{#pr-squash-commits}

1. You may want to set your EDITOR variable to the editor of choice prior to starting this.
2. `git rebase -i <commit-right-before-your-first-commit>`
3. You'll then see all of your commits from oldest to newest like this:
```
pick 109c178 Improve TPS by 20 percent
pick 0737bd6 Remove useless mutex in turbine
...
pick <commit hash X> <commit message X>
pick <commit hash Y> forgot a file
pick <commit hash Z> pleasing CI
...
pick 3f96c5c better naming for new structures
```

> 4. To squash the trivial commits Y and Z into X (maybe they are all related or commits Y and Z are just formatting/clippy), you would update the file to look like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. To squash the trivial commits Y and Z into X (maybe they are all related or commits Y and Z are just formatting/clippy), update the file to look like:
```
